If you can keep your head when all about you   
    Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,   
If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, 
    But make allowance for their doubting too;   
If you can wait and not be tired by waiting, 
    Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies, 
Or being hated, don’t give way to hating, 
    And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise: 

If you can dream—and not make dreams your master;   
    If you can think—and not make thoughts your aim;   
If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster 
    And treat those two impostors just the same;   
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken 
    Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools, 
Or watch the things you gave your life to, broken, 
    And stoop and build ’em up with worn-out tools: 

If you can make one heap of all your winnings 
    And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss, 
And lose, and start again at your beginnings 
    And never breathe a word about your loss; 
If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew 
    To serve your turn long after they are gone,   
And so hold on when there is nothing in you 
    Except the Will which says to them: ‘Hold on!’ 

If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,   
    Or walk with Kings—nor lose the common touch, 
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you, 
    If all men count with you, but none too much; 
If you can fill the unforgiving minute 
    With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,   
Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,   
    And—which is more—you’ll be a Man, my son!

You may talk o’ gin and beer   
When you’re quartered safe out ’ere,   
An’ you’re sent to penny-fights an’ Aldershot it; 
But when it comes to slaughter   
You will do your work on water, 
An’ you’ll lick the bloomin’ boots of ’im that’s got it.   
Now in Injia’s sunny clime,   
Where I used to spend my time   
A-servin’ of ’Er Majesty the Queen,   
Of all them blackfaced crew   
The finest man I knew 
Was our regimental bhisti, Gunga Din,   
      He was ‘Din! Din! Din! 
   ‘You limpin’ lump o’ brick-dust, Gunga Din! 
      ‘Hi! Slippy hitherao 
      ‘Water, get it! Panee lao, 
   ‘You squidgy-nosed old idol, Gunga Din.’ 

The uniform ’e wore 
Was nothin’ much before, 
An’ rather less than ’arf o’ that be’ind, 
For a piece o’ twisty rag   
An’ a goatskin water-bag 
Was all the field-equipment ’e could find. 
When the sweatin’ troop-train lay 
In a sidin’ through the day, 
Where the ’eat would make your bloomin’ eyebrows crawl, 
We shouted ‘Harry By!’ 
Till our throats were bricky-dry, 
Then we wopped ’im ’cause ’e couldn’t serve us all. 
      It was ‘Din! Din! Din! 
   ‘You ’eathen, where the mischief ’ave you been?   
      ‘You put some juldee in it 
      ‘Or I’ll marrow you this minute 
   ‘If you don’t fill up my helmet, Gunga Din!’ 

’E would dot an’ carry one 
Till the longest day was done; 
An’ ’e didn’t seem to know the use o’ fear. 
If we charged or broke or cut, 
You could bet your bloomin’ nut, 
’E’d be waitin’ fifty paces right flank rear.   
With ’is mussick on ’is back, 
’E would skip with our attack, 
An’ watch us till the bugles made 'Retire,’   
An’ for all ’is dirty ’ide 
’E was white, clear white, inside 
When ’e went to tend the wounded under fire!   
      It was ‘Din! Din! Din!’ 
   With the bullets kickin’ dust-spots on the green.   
      When the cartridges ran out, 
      You could hear the front-ranks shout,   
   ‘Hi! ammunition-mules an' Gunga Din!’ 

I shan’t forgit the night 
When I dropped be’ind the fight 
With a bullet where my belt-plate should ’a’ been.   
I was chokin’ mad with thirst, 
An’ the man that spied me first 
Was our good old grinnin’, gruntin’ Gunga Din.   
’E lifted up my ’ead, 
An’ he plugged me where I bled, 
An’ ’e guv me ’arf-a-pint o’ water green. 
It was crawlin’ and it stunk, 
But of all the drinks I’ve drunk, 
I’m gratefullest to one from Gunga Din. 
      It was 'Din! Din! Din! 
   ‘’Ere’s a beggar with a bullet through ’is spleen;   
   ‘’E's chawin’ up the ground, 
      ‘An’ ’e’s kickin’ all around: 
   ‘For Gawd’s sake git the water, Gunga Din!’ 

’E carried me away 
To where a dooli lay, 
An’ a bullet come an’ drilled the beggar clean.   
’E put me safe inside, 
An’ just before ’e died, 
'I ’ope you liked your drink,’ sez Gunga Din.   
So I’ll meet ’im later on 
At the place where ’e is gone— 
Where it’s always double drill and no canteen.   
’E’ll be squattin’ on the coals 
Givin’ drink to poor damned souls, 
An’ I’ll get a swig in hell from Gunga Din!   
      Yes, Din! Din! Din! 
   You Lazarushian-leather Gunga Din!   
   Though I’ve belted you and flayed you,   
      By the livin’ Gawd that made you, 
   You’re a better man than I am, Gunga Din!

"HAVE you news of my boy Jack? "
Not this tide.
"When d'you think that he'll come back?" 
Not with this wind blowing, and this tide.
"Has any one else had word of him?"
Not this tide. 
For what is sunk will hardly swim, 
Not with this wind blowing, and this tide.

"Oh, dear, what comfort can I find?" 
None this tide,
Nor any tide,
Except he did not shame his kind--- 
Not even with that wind blowing, and that tide.

Then hold your head up all the more,
This tide,
And every tide;
Because he was the son you bore,
And gave to that wind blowing and that tide.

BY THE old Moulmein Pagoda, lookin' lazy at the sea,
There's a Burma girl a-settin', and I know she thinks o' me;
For the wind is in the palm-trees, and the temple-bells they say:
"Come you back, you British soldier; come you back to Mandalay! "
Come you back to Mandalay,
Where the old Flotilla lay:
Can't you 'ear their paddles chunkin' from Rangoon to Mandalay ?
On the road to Mandalay,
Where the flyin'-fishes play,
An' the dawn comes up like thunder outer China 'crost the Bay!
'Er petticoat was yaller an' 'er little cap was green,
An' 'er name was Supi-yaw-lat - jes' the same as Theebaw's Queen, 
An' I seed her first a-smokin' of a whackin' white cheroot,
An' a-wastin' Christian kisses on an 'eathen idol's foot:
Bloomin' idol made o' mud 
Wot they called the Great Gawd Budd
Plucky lot she cared for idols when I kissed 'er where she stud!
On the road to Mandalay...

When the mist was on the rice-fields an' the sun was droppin' slow,
She'd git 'er little banjo an' she'd sing "Kulla-lo-lo!
With 'er arm upon my shoulder an' 'er cheek agin my cheek
We useter watch the steamers an' the hathis pilin' teak.
Elephints a-pilin' teak
In the sludgy, squdgy creek,
Where the silence 'ung that 'eavy you was 'arf afraid to speak!
On the road to Mandalay...

But that's all shove be'ind me - long ago an' fur away 
An' there ain't no 'busses runnin' from the Bank to Mandalay;
An' I'm learnin' 'ere in London what the ten-year soldier tells:
"If you've 'eard the East a-callin', you won't never 'eed naught else."
No! you won't 'eed nothin' else
But them spicy garlic smells,
An' the sunshine an' the palm-trees an' the tinkly temple-bells;
On the road to Mandalay...

I am sick o' wastin' leather on these gritty pavin'-stones,
An' the blasted English drizzle wakes the fever in my bones;
Tho' I walks with fifty 'ousemaids outer Chelsea to the Strand,
An' they talks a lot o' lovin', but wot do they understand?
Beefy face an' grubby 'and - 
Law! wot do they understand?
I've a neater, sweeter maiden in a cleaner, greener land!
On the road to Mandalay...

Ship me somewheres east of Suez, where the best is like the worst,
Where there aren't no Ten Commandments an' a man can raise a thirst;
For the temple-bells are callin', an' it's there that I would be
By the old Moulmein Pagoda, looking lazy at the sea;
On the road to Mandalay,
Where the old Flotilla lay,
With our sick beneath the awnings when we went to Mandalay!
O the road to Mandalay,
Where the flyin'-fishes play,
An' the dawn comes up like thunder outer China 'crost the Bay !

God of our fathers, known of old, 
   Lord of our far-flung battle-line, 
Beneath whose awful Hand we hold 
   Dominion over palm and pine— 
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, 
Lest we forget—lest we forget! 

The tumult and the shouting dies; 
   The Captains and the Kings depart: 
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice, 
   An humble and a contrite heart. 
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, 
Lest we forget—lest we forget! 

Far-called, our navies melt away; 
   On dune and headland sinks the fire: 
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday 
   Is one with Nineveh and Tyre! 
Judge of the Nations, spare us yet, 
Lest we forget—lest we forget! 

If, drunk with sight of power, we loose 
   Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe, 
Such boastings as the Gentiles use, 
   Or lesser breeds without the Law— 
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet, 
Lest we forget—lest we forget! 

For heathen heart that puts her trust 
   In reeking tube and iron shard, 
All valiant dust that builds on dust, 
   And guarding, calls not Thee to guard, 
For frantic boast and foolish word— 
Thy mercy on Thy People, Lord! 

I KEEP six honest serving-men
 (They taught me all I knew);
Their names are What and Why and When 
 And How and Where and Who.
I send them over land and sea,
 I send them east and west;
But after they have worked for me,
 I give them all a rest.

I let them rest from nine till five,
 For I am busy then,
As well as breakfast, lunch, and tea,
 For they are hungry men.
But different folk have different views; 
I know a person small—
She keeps ten million serving-men,
Who get no rest at all!

She sends'em abroad on her own affairs,
 From the second she opens her eyes—
One million Hows, two million Wheres,
And seven million Whys!

’AVE you ’eard o’ the Widow at Windsor
 With a hairy gold crown on ’er ’ead?
She ’as ships on the foam—she ’as millions at ’ome,
An’ she pays us poor beggars in red.
(Ow, poor beggars in red!)
There’s ’er nick on the cavalry ’orses,
There’s ’er mark on the medical stores—
An’ ’er troopers you’ll find with a fair wind be’ind
That takes us to various wars.
(Poor beggars!—barbarious wars!)
Then ’ere’s to the Widow at Windsor,
 An’ ’ere’s to the stores an’ the guns,
The men an’ the ’orses what makes up the forces
O’ Missis Victorier’s sons.
(Poor beggars! Victorier’s sons!) 

Walk wide o’ the Widow at Windsor,
 For ’alf o’ Creation she owns:
We ’ave bought ’er the same with the sword an’ the flame,
An’ we’ve salted it down with our bones.
 (Poor beggars!—it’s blue with our bones!)
Hands off o’ the sons o’ the Widow,
Hands off o’ the goods in ’er shop,
For the Kings must come down an’ the Emperors frown
 When the Widow at Windsor says “Stop”!
 (Poor beggars!—we’re sent to say “Stop”!)
Then ’ere’s to the Lodge o’ the Widow,
From the Pole to the Tropics it runs—
To the Lodge that we tile with the rank an’ the file,
An’ open in form with the guns.
(Poor beggars!—it’s always they guns!) 

We ’ave ’eard o’ the Widow at Windsor,
It’s safest to let ’er alone:
For ’er sentries we stand by the sea an’ the land
Wherever the bugles are blown.
(Poor beggars!—an’ don’t we get blown!)
Take ’old o’ the Wings o’ the Mornin’,
An’ flop round the earth till you’re dead;
But you won’t get away from the tune that they play
To the bloomin’ old rag over’ead.
 (Poor beggars!—it’s ’ot over’ead!)
Then ’ere’s to the sons o’ the Widow,
Wherever, ’owever they roam.
’Ere’s all they desire, an’ if they require
A speedy return to their ’ome.
(Poor beggars!—they’ll never see ’ome!) 


